rpm_install/README.md, before:

## [ For end-user to deploy NGDS ckan application via rpm ]

To install the NGDS ckan on a CentOS box, start with a CentOS 6.4 x86_64 minimal download. Keep everything as original as you can, then run the following commands:

    yum update -y ca-certificates

    cd /etc/yum.repos.d/
    curl -fsLOS http://NGDS-RPM-SERVER/libxml2.repo
    curl -fsLOS http://NGDS-RPM-SERVER/ngds.repo

    rpm -Uvh http://download.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/6/i386/epel-release-6-8.noarch.rpm
    rpm -Uvh http://yum.postgresql.org/9.1/redhat/rhel-6.3-x86_64/pgdg-centos91-9.1-4.noarch.rpm
    rpm -Uvh http://yum.postgresql.org/9.3/redhat/rhel-6-x86_64/pgdg-centos93-9.3-1.noarch.rpm

    yum install -y libxml2-2.9.0 gdal-1.9.2 gdal-python-1.9.2 gdal-devel-1.9.2 yum-utils
    yum-config-manager --disable pgdg93
    yum install ngds.ckan

After all steps completed, you should be able to access the NGDS ckan application via http://CENTOS-IP-ADDRESS/.

### Optional post installation:

To add a sysadmin user, register an account on the web gui, then run the following commands to promote it to sysadmin.

    ckan sysadmin add <username>

To enable harvester, uncomment the cron job at `/etc/cron.d/ckan-harvest`

### Updating existing NGDS application:

When NGDS releases new rpm, you can upgrade exisitng NGDS ckan application with the following command:

    yum install ngds.ckan

## [ For developer to build rpm via ansible script ]

For NGDS developers, when new code changes are ready on github repository, you can integrate the changes from git into rpm package and release a new rpm version to end users. The rpm building process can be done directly on officical NGDS-RPM-SERVER server, or done on a local CentOS 6.4 x86_64 box as rpm build server, then transfer the rpm files to NGDS-RPM-SERVER. To prepare the CentOS box ready for the rpm building, here are the steps:

    yum update -y ca-certificates

    cd /etc/yum.repos.d/
    curl -fsLOS http://NGDS-RPM-SERVER/libxml2.repo

    rpm -Uvh http://download.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/6/i386/epel-release-6-8.noarch.rpm
    rpm -Uvh http://yum.postgresql.org/9.1/redhat/rhel-6.3-x86_64/pgdg-centos91-9.1-4.noarch.rpm
    rpm -Uvh http://yum.postgresql.org/9.3/redhat/rhel-6-x86_64/pgdg-centos93-9.3-1.noarch.rpm

    yum install -y libxml2-2.9.0 libxml2-devel-2.9.0 libxml2-python-2.9.0 gdal-1.9.2 gdal-python-1.9.2 gdal-devel-1.9.2 yum-utils
    yum-config-manager --disable pgdg93

To build rpm, you need to install ansible client on your workstation, add a ansible hosts file pointing to the ip address of the CentOS rpm build server, then run the ansible script:

    ansible-playbook -i hosts ngds-buildserver.yml

When done, the new rpm package will at http://CENTOS-RPM-SERVER/ngds-repo/.

Commit message:

Update README to add prerequisites

rpm_install/README.md, after:

## [ For end-user to deploy NGDS ckan application via rpm ]

### Prerequisites:
1. CentOS 6.4 x86_64 minimal install. 50 GB disk space and 4GM RAM are recommended. Keep everything as original as you can. Other version of CentOS has not been tested.
2. Internet access is ready. You should be able to `ping www.yahoo.com` from your CentOS box.
3. root ssh login is enabled. You should be able to ssh into your CentOS box from your workstation and execute installation commands. 

### Installation:

To install the NGDS ckan on a CentOS box, run the following commands. For now, use yum.tigbox.com for NGDS-RPM-SERVER::

    yum update -y ca-certificates

    cd /etc/yum.repos.d/
    curl -fsLOS http://NGDS-RPM-SERVER/libxml2.repo
    curl -fsLOS http://NGDS-RPM-SERVER/ngds.repo

    rpm -Uvh http://download.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/6/i386/epel-release-6-8.noarch.rpm
    rpm -Uvh http://yum.postgresql.org/9.1/redhat/rhel-6.3-x86_64/pgdg-centos91-9.1-4.noarch.rpm
    rpm -Uvh http://yum.postgresql.org/9.3/redhat/rhel-6-x86_64/pgdg-centos93-9.3-1.noarch.rpm

    yum install -y libxml2-2.9.0 gdal-1.9.2 gdal-python-1.9.2 gdal-devel-1.9.2 yum-utils
    yum-config-manager --disable pgdg93
    yum install ngds.ckan

After all steps completed, you should be able to access the NGDS ckan application via http://CENTOS-IP-ADDRESS/.

### Optional post installation:

To add a sysadmin user, register an account on the web gui, then run the following commands to promote it to sysadmin.

    ckan sysadmin add <username>

To enable harvester, uncomment the cron job at `/etc/cron.d/ckan-harvest`

### Updating existing NGDS application:

When NGDS releases new rpm, you can upgrade exisitng NGDS ckan application with the following command:

    yum install ngds.ckan

## [ For developer to build rpm via ansible script ]

For NGDS developers, when new code changes are ready on github repository, you can integrate the changes from git into rpm package and release a new rpm version to end users. The rpm building process can be done directly on officical NGDS-RPM-SERVER server, or done on a local CentOS 6.4 x86_64 box as rpm build server, then transfer the rpm files to NGDS-RPM-SERVER. To prepare the CentOS box ready for the rpm building, here are the steps:

    yum update -y ca-certificates

    cd /etc/yum.repos.d/
    curl -fsLOS http://NGDS-RPM-SERVER/libxml2.repo

    rpm -Uvh http://download.fedoraproject.org/pub/epel/6/i386/epel-release-6-8.noarch.rpm
    rpm -Uvh http://yum.postgresql.org/9.1/redhat/rhel-6.3-x86_64/pgdg-centos91-9.1-4.noarch.rpm
    rpm -Uvh http://yum.postgresql.org/9.3/redhat/rhel-6-x86_64/pgdg-centos93-9.3-1.noarch.rpm

    yum install -y libxml2-2.9.0 libxml2-devel-2.9.0 libxml2-python-2.9.0 gdal-1.9.2 gdal-python-1.9.2 gdal-devel-1.9.2 yum-utils
    yum-config-manager --disable pgdg93

To build rpm, you need to install ansible client on your workstation, add a ansible hosts file pointing to the ip address of the CentOS rpm build server, then run the ansible script:

    ansible-playbook -i hosts ngds-buildserver.yml

When done, the new rpm package will at http://CENTOS-RPM-SERVER/ngds-repo/.
